---
title: Tech Community Building
pubDatetime: 2021-04-29T12:13:24.000Z
description: Tech Community Building
tags:
  - programming
---

## The Need for Community

Wayfair's engineering team has gone through immense growth over the past few years sometimes hiring
and onboarding over 40 engineers per month. In such extreme conditions it can be difficult to hold
onto culture and teams begin to sub-divide making it difficult to keep in touch with what everyone
is doing. Additionally, most engineers are on small cross-functional teams making it difficult to
get a sense community across any single function (e.g. frontend engineers).

## Introducing Leagues

With this challenge in mind we set out to create technical focused groups to encourage community
building and technical excellence. We introduced the concept of "Leagues" as organized functional
groups that meet to learn and grow together. Our initial leagues were JavaScript, server side, iOS,
and Android.

Each league has a lead who is responsible for tracking member sign-up and event attendance. Each
league breaks down into chapters of ~10 members each who meet regularly to take part in a planned
activity. Each chapter has a lead who is responsible for scheduling the meeting and having some
activity planned.

## Initial Learning

At the start we had high hopes for activities including book clubs, live code review sessions, code
spelunking (deep dive into codebase), formal presentations, and live coding. But we quickly found
that engineers were most comfortable and successful with one specific format: presentation followed
by discussion. This allows one engineer to practice presenting and diving into a specific topic, and
discussion let all members participate.

Additionally we schedule a quarterly all-hands meeting to get all chapters together for
presentations and discussion.

The initial success spawned new leagues for QA, managers, and cross-platform engineers. We also send
quarterly newsletters with recordings and notes from the meetings to keep all engineers in the loop
and to solicit membership.

## Covid Hit Hard

After going full remote in March activity significantly died down. Remote community building is
difficult. Additionally, it was becoming difficult to consistently find people ready with content to
present due to busy times of the year and topics we've already covered. One silver lining was that
our previously remote engineers were now on a level playing field and happy to participate.

The league leads grouped to try different things. The iOS league shifted chapters to be more topic
focused and made membership fluid. This way engineers can pick topics they're most interested in,
have consistent topic, and choose a chapter that best fits their schedule. The JS league introduced
a remote panel format all hands meeting where a smaller set of people talk and we field questions
from the audience.

Finally, we introduced "clubs" as targeted learning groups that meet weekly to tackle specific
course material. All credit goes to Kent C. Dodds for this idea. The difference between what we've
tried before and clubs is the emphasis on measuring value and getting buy-in and commitment. Club
dates and times are chosen before sign-up so that engineers can speak with their manager and confirm
they have the time to commit. We're tracking value in a few ways: feedback from club lead during the
course, feedback via NPS (Net Promoter Score) at the end of the course, and a followup survey one
month after the course to see how the information was used in day-to-day projects.

## Where we're heading

We're going to continue to evolve to optimize for career growth, learning, and a sense of community
while keeping what works. Something we're going to try soon is weekly coffee chats. So far our sense
of community is very tightly tied to technical skill and learning but there's so much more to
engineer career development and life and we want a forum to bring this community to life.

We're also trialing a private instance of Forem, the platform that powers this site (dev.to). Having
a place for open long-form async communication is a key missing piece of communication in the
company.

To sum up my key take aways: community building is hard and requires dedicated owners, there is no
one size fits all strategy so keep trying new things, and to keep an eye on moving the needle on the
problem you're trying to solve.
