---
title: Product Hype
pubDatetime: 2025-08-25T17:20:37.005Z
description: Product Hype
tags: 
  - management
  - productivity
  - programming
---

> Most marketing is evil.

> A product hype wave can be an engineering apathy wave.

When product sells something that is not thought through, not real, not worked
on and iterated on, without talking to engineering, they are building a hype
wave that is an apathy wave for engineering. The engineers would like to say how
messed up this is, but product has already made the unforced error, so why
bother.

A great product person will be open to feedback and change patterns based on how
engineers feel. I have yet to meet a great product person.

Good marketing is when the data and evidence shows that something is far better
than it is perceived to be. The marketing works to close that gap by making the
otherwise boring look flashy and highlighting the real impact relative to other
things. Good marketing can steelman their opponents and still win.

Evil marketing (almost all marketing) is when a company is stretching to be
something they are not. They need to build hype and sell whether or not there is
a real product to do so. They _would_ get blown over immediately if compared to
opponents realistically, and so the only way to win is to distract, over sell
and under deliver, and follow that quickly by the next distraction so nobody
notices.

This sort of marketing can be seen at the individual, team, and company level.
Think iPod vs Zune, or iPhone vs Nokia windows phone. I can tell from
experience, I was at the windows phone launch event in person, and it was all
marketing. When you actually hold the device and try to use it you could tell it
was purely vaporware with no real thought or data behind it being a good
product.
